Very recently as our part of our series
on the Arab-Israeli conflict, we talked
about the beginning of the settler
movement.
>> Certainly the most impactful piece of
media that has shown a light on this in
the last couple of years was Louis Thu's
2025 documentary, The Settlers. And
today we're very lucky to be joined by
Louie.
>> My pleasure. Thank you for having me.
Looking forward to the conversation.
>> Well, I mean, we're thrilled to have
you. Um because you know in a way you've
had two bites at this particular piece
of fruit. Um tell tell us why you know
it was important to go back cuz 2011 was
Ultra Zionist and and that was a film
where the protagonist of your second
film sort of makes a brief appearance
and then you had set. Yeah. She's almost
a cameo in that.
>> So to to dial back I mean I'm very
self-conscious about not being an expert
on this specific subject. I'm a
generalist and I do all kinds of
documentaries on forms of human what I
call weirdness. It's not a very exact
term, but ways in which we as people uh
act in in ways that are sort of
self-sabotaging that are in informed by
some kind of tribalism or bigotry
sometimes or criminal action or uh
impulses coming to from the most basic
parts of our brain. And in a way, the
settlers and the occupation of the West
Bank speaks to several aspects of that.
This episode is brought to you by Atio,
the AI CRM. The larger an empire
becomes, the harder it is to know what's
happening across it. Modern
organizations face the same sort of
problem, and ATIO helps solve it. Atio
is an AI CRM designed for how teams
really operate. Sync your email and
calendar and you're up and running in
minutes. From there, ATIO brings your
conversations and contacts together in
one place so your team can see what is
happening in real time. Askier goes a
step further. Simply ask questions about
your pipeline, which deals are moving
fastest, where the momentum is building
or what needs attention next, and get a
clear answer in moments. With Atio, you
can focus on the real work of building
your empire from day one onwards. Try
Atoio for free at
io.com/mpire
which is informed by a kind of religious
nationalist tribalist mindset and uh
supported by a a a kind of
military/judicial
infrastructure backed up um by by the
army the IDF. So uh I've done cult
stories in America. I've done stories
about racism and nationalism in America.
I've done crime stories in America. And
this is all three unfolding in this area
of the west, this relatively small area
of the West Bank. So that was what took
me there in in 2011.
And um it was extraordinary just to to
say it was in the in the kind of the
broad buffet of the things that I do. It
was extraordinary to see extremism sort
of played out live before your eyes in
such a mainstream way. Like it's it's
hard to put it more exactly than that.
>> I know exactly what you mean, though.
aspects of sort of a a kind of
conspiracy-minded or gunobsessed
American extremism you would see in the
hills of Idaho or Montana or or or you
know I mean all over but in kind of
isolated locals but generally not backed
up by the army or or by law enforcement
and and here it felt like it was part of
day-to-day life. In the years that
followed, I moved on to other stories.
Um, you know, I made three trips in that
20 in that for that 2011 film. Post
October 7th, I'd been reading that the
situation was even worse. I mean, it
never kind of it was never too remote
for my thinking. like whenever I thought
back about story I'm always thinking
about revisiting but for this one in
particular because it was as I say so
extreme it felt like um this well
there's a form of a partaid taking place
in the West Bank and um and to see that
you know not in history books but in
plain sight in the here and now so
having read about it in the New York
Times the New Yorker and a couple of
other places uh post October 7th and
hearing that it was more if anything
worse that the displacement was going on
at a higher rate that the level of de
facto ethnic cleansing was taking place
more intensively. I thought it was it
would be um worth going back.
>> I mean it's s it is such a powerful
piece of television for if you're one of
the maybe three people who hasn't seen
this already go and watch it. Um but
just give you a taste of this. I mean,
there is a there is a moment in in your
settler's documentary which to me really
stands out. You know, it's a it's that
moment when a 79year-old woman shoves
you in the chest hard.
>> And not just any 79y old woman, we
should say.
>> We're talking about the the the
godmother of the Israeli settler
movement. And and when I said, you know,
she played this cameo role in your first
and then she came back. We're talking
about a woman called Dianiela Weiss um
who has the ear of Netanyahu's office.
That comes across beautifully in in in
your documentary.
Tell me what makes you think she said
yes to you because you have a reputation
now. Basically, people don't come out
very well after after you scrutinize
them. You know, you you ask them to face
what it is they're saying and doing. Why
did she say yes? Well, I sometimes think
that um pe people when they watch my
films see what conforms to the to their
way of thinking. So that in other words,
if I do a story about something like the
Westboro Baptist Church in the Midwest,
you know, a religious hate group kind of
a cult, you know, you or I might watch
that and think these people are deeply
destructive. They watch that film and
think, "Yeah, I think we did a pretty
good job of getting our message across."
And the idiot journalist doesn't get it
right. So I uh I I think Daniela Weiss
would see that film, you know, the
settlers or indeed the ultraionists and
think, "Yeah, uh it's what I expect from
a kind of brainwashed BBC journalist."
And that's fine. She will speak to
almost anyone. Like I I think even if uh
Al Jazzer asked for an interview, she'd
probably be inclined to grant one. She's
so uninterested in the reactions of
people outside of her way of thinking
that she couldn't care less. In fact, I
think it's really striking. You know,
she's this rather I should say paint a
picture for those people who haven't
seen. She's kind rather a charismatic as
many extremes
are like and certainly in leadership
positions. her level of, you know, for
her age of her ability to galvanize and
and kind of win over the cohorts of the
people who are inclined to sympathize is
extraordinary. Um, alas, it's dedicated
to this very exclusionary vision of a
greater Israel that takes over not just
the West Bank and Gaza, as we see in the
film, but in fact, I think she'd like
parts of Syria, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon,
and so on. But she'll speak to anyone
and and I think um in fact when she
pushes me it's almost I want to say this
hesitantly. She pushes me I should say
as as a way of illustrating when I ask
her you know is she not troubled by the
actions of settler extremists these
people who who are on video going about
torching intimidating attacking shooting
Palestinians. I said like you've seen
this like this is going on all the time.
And um she says, "Well, that's only ever
a reaction and you're only seeing half
the story. That's in reaction to
something probably much more horrific
that's taking place." And for example,
if I push you and she pushes me, you
like you're going to push me back and
then surprise surprise like I I choose
not to push her back. You stand there
and she sort of again do watch this as I
will never do this justice. But she sort
of just looks at you for a while and
it's in the silences that you know we as
the audience can get to feel all the
feels and think all the things. But she
does say right at the end she goes I
wish you would have pushed me.
>> I wish you would push me. But the other
revealing thing because there's a second
I met her three on three occasions on
that trip and the f the first interview
is at her house and I I I mentioned to
her that um moving uh civilian
populations into an area that's under
military occupation is considered a a
war crime as I understand.
>> Yeah. I mean you're very brave. You go
straight out and put it to her.
>> Yeah. Thank you. I mean I don't know how
brave brave it was. Uh given she's an
older lady. I think I could take her if
we rumbled. I think I could have taken
her but um and she said she she laughs
her reaction is she she she laughs and
says so so you are sitting so you are
involved in the war criminal or
something like that and I said well I'm
interviewing you but in other words she
finds it funny so so negligible so you
know so trivial that it's actually
amusing the only time you see her lose
her composure because even the push I I
would argue is playful is intended uh
playfully but um when I say that
actually by the Israeli establishment
itself that even by figures from the
security establishment they view her
activities um as dangerous and
terroristic like that she's been
described by Ronan Bar who I think was
the head of Shinbet
>> she got quite quite chatty about that
>> she as a terrorist then she gets really
angry and I think it speaks to that
thing which you were referring to the
the idea that she she she cares nothing
for the judgment of the world but within
her fraternity of of of Jew of of the
Jew religious Jewish community. The idea
of them pushing back, the idea of them
passing judgment on her is deeply
offensive because they're in her eyes
traitors to their own cause. Louis,
before you do one of these things and
you go to I mean, you've gone to some
pretty, you know, extreme folk, not just
weird, but folk, but some pretty extreme
folk in over the course of your career.
Do you does your sort of heart sink when
you're sort of about to enter a
settlement or or or do you sort of
salivate at the prospect of of copy that
that slither of ice in the heart of the
journalist that you need?
>> I'd uh I don't think I'd be doing the
job I did if my heart sank every time I
was going to meet someone with views
that I found objectionable. Maybe what
does it say about me? But I'm I'm not
sure. I do I I there's a part of being
having a front seat uh a front row seat
to the extremes of the human experience
that I genuinely
enjoy. And I know that sounds there
wasn't as awful as you know what's
happening in the West Bank is ex is
extraordinarily awful. Like before doing
this call, I was thinking about how do I
convey what it's like? And I was
thinking about the activities of ICE in
America and the fact that last year two
people in Minnesota, I think in
Minneapolis were shot dead by ICE, the
immigration enforcement agency. And I
was thinking like, but what's happening
in the West Bank is like that day in day
out
>> on a much bigger scale. Yeah.
>> All through the year being done by
>> a a a military force that isn't even
from that place. You know, imagine a
military force coming in and and
shooting people in the streets for
alleged infractions and and and so the
outrage should be commensurate with the
awfulness of how that of how that looks.
But having said that, when I was there,
there wasn't a day when I woke up when I
didn't think what a what a strange and
dark privilege it is to be able to
document that and to be able to to be on
a story that feels worthy of the world's
attention.
>> And it is. It is. I mean there's lots of
reasons to be anxious doing that sort of
movie. A obviously it is potentially
quite violent and and difficult and you
did you know have lots of people with
guns and and there are stones thrown at
cars in the West Bank and you know
there's a lot goes on there and
particularly at the moment it's it's
it's a rough time but also it's the
hottest of all potatoes to get through a
broadcasting system. Uh it's a it's the
hottest of all potatoes in terms of
audiences. People feel very very
strongly about this. Were you anxious
that that you were going to tread on
landmines?
>> The short version is yes. I I give
credit to the BBC for uh allowing me to
make the film and it was invigilated and
supervised
u scrupulously almost infuriatingly so
uh at every stage. Uh but not just in
terms of doing justice like absolutely
being scrupulously correct about how
Israeli military actions or settle
activities are discussed but also doing
kind of correctly uh there's this sort
of gravitational pull towards
uh an Israeli narrative because for
whatever reason um I think the allies of
Israel's actions have have done an
amazing job of making their presence
felt and making sure that you know any
any sort of overstepping overstatement
woolly phrasiology gets policed right I
you know I feel I feel as you know there
there's aspect of that that's healthy
you know would that it were the case on
all sides but similarly we have to
interrogate that the pal you that are
that we're doing the same level of care
to represent the Palestinian reality
it's truth truthfully I got critiqued
from both like in terms of like some
people who watched it who were sort of
sympathetic to the Israeli kind of way
of looking at things were like oh well
it's one-sided you haven't really shown
how this you know these people are extra
crazy no one no one takes them seriously
which by the way is not the case you
know Daniela Weiss enjoys enormous
influence but similarly on the other
side some people like well it's 15 or 20
minutes before you meet a Palestinian
person right and it's a farmer speaking
it in Arabic and then I quickly move on
to talk to an Israeli peace activist and
across the board I'm giving you could
argue a megaphone to the to uh the
settlers and so I think some people felt
well you've kind of erased you you've
sort of erased the the Palestinian place
>> someone complained you didn't tell the
Nakba story didn't they
>> yeah there was a guy who I met who in a
village who's like you didn't really
discuss how we've already been displaced
he told me a story on camera about how
he'd ended up in this village in the
West Bank near Hebrron But prior to
that, he'd been in what's now uh Israel
and displaced from that, I believe. And
so there's a sort of ongoing compounding
of refugee status, and he was
understandably upset. And realistically,
and I've been at screenings where people
have made similar uh complaints and I
just have to say I work in a way when I
make films that tends to be perpetrator
focused. I try and interrogate those
people who have the most power like and
the ones who have the most power and
this actually speaks to the idea that oh
it's one-sided in a sense you could
argue it is because I'm looking at the
people who are in control of the tanks
and uh who are actually uh benefiting
from the occupation to interrogate their
choices and other films could be made
but this is the one that I wanted to
make. So, so I mean I'm really
interested in in that sort of
journalistic vibe uh that comes from you
because you know in a way every
journalist and you know we three have
all done this job. You want to get to
the truth but when you have somebody who
is saying black is white, white is black
and I'll give you the thing that I'm
thinking about. You know you you go with
Daniel Weiss and you're on this hill
above the Palestinian town of Beta and
you're asking her about settler violence
and she said there is no such thing. And
then you point out the footage that
you've got in the film of an armed
settler shooting a Palestinian protester
at point blank range. Um, by the way, he
only he gets his gun confiscated, but
he's not imprisoned. And an Israeli
soldier is is is standing by. And and
she says, well, uh, you know, she kind
of like doesn't accept that that's
settler violence. If if you can't get to
somebody by showing them to their face,
something that we can all see,
what does that do to, you know, your
sense of fairness or or journalism?
>> Uh, you know, it's not an unfamiliar
role for me to be talking to someone
who's obstinately refusing to see the
facts in the way that she does. Um she I
think I mentioned I I done I did a story
about a cult in the Midwest in which one
of the leaders was this woman called
Shirley Phelps Roer. She had a similar
energy for one amazing
>> the West Baptist Church. So she had a
similar energy and I feel as though um
it would have been a problem in the film
if if as a as a viewer you hadn't
already seen video uh from from some you
know filmed of settler violence but
because you have then the view is able
to draw their own conclusion as to how
credible Daniela is you know and she is
quite evidently willfully refusing to
see the facts and it's almost a
terminological ical issue like
>> um you know it was Max Vber who said
that the state is the institution that
has the monopoly of legitimate violence
in a given area. You could argue she's
speaking in a varian sense. She's saying
any violence that's inflicted by
settlers in the West Bank is a kind of
law enforcement activity that is part of
their monopolistic right to control and
occupy the region that God gave them.
You've talked um about the very strong
leadership, but I I really want to know
whether in all of your travels and and
talking to the people who follow these
people, whether you see a commonality in
in tribalism, if we can put it that way,
is there something in the human
condition that means people switch off
their own questioning and follow people
who say black is white and white is
black?
>> I think that Daniela Weiss is an extreme
version of something that exists in all
of us. And um you know one of the you
know I try not to be overly invested in
how well I've done you know in a film
but genuinely like when I watch that
encounter with Daniela Weiss there's a
moment where I say like uh she she's
talking about look there's I know
there's beta over there she says
pointing to the Palestinian town she
says I don't think about beta I think
about here here is a settlement and here
is a settlement and here is a
settlement. So she she would say like
she has no animus against Palestinian
people. She just doesn't think about
them. Like she is only thinking about
how to advance the cause of of of Jewish
nationalism in the region. And I say to
her um you know to think about um your
own people first is understandable but
to think about other people not at all
seems sociopathic. So the reason I like
I like I'm quite I'm sort of pleased
that because it's kind of pious to say
like oh I don't distinguish between my
own children and children halfway around
the world right that's clearly not the
case but that's also the beginnings of
tribalism isn't it
>> well sure but and that I mean that is
also the the Westbor Baptist church you
know it's it's us in the church we're
the ones that matter and you know
everyone outside is is potentially an
enemy and and actually we don't care we
don't think about them you we we will do
what we do because we care about our
family. Does that depress you about the
human spirit that so many people are
willing to switch off the part of
themselves that thinks, you know what,
this person who is standing either
surveying a a smoldering village or is
protesting at a funeral of a dead
serviceman that they're willing to
switch that off and follow. What What
have you learned about the human
condition that that can happen? Well, I
sometimes pretentiously quote nature and
say
>> as one does
>> as one does, especially if you're a
perennial kind of existentialist
student, you know, plonker. But, you
know, he one of one of his things is um
madness in individuals is rare, but in
periods of time, nations and religions,
it's the norm. So, that we are all
capable of being indoctrinated in forms
of irrationality. Um, so is it
depressing? Yes. Uh especially in light
of so much of it is informed by an
infrastructure of Jewish persecution.
You know, the idea of like we've
suffered across the centuries as Jewish
people and and that um therefore the the
the extrapolation from that is like how
could we ever be accused of of hurting
others of of of displacing or or or
inflicting genocide on on others. But I
think you know you what what is the
conclusion? It's just that we it
requires this sort of endless attempt to
police your own impulses. Uh you know I
think I some say like selective
compassion isn't compassion. It is
tribalism. Right. So it's about trying
to throw throw the throw your arms
around a wider community. But you know
it all sounds a bit nambby pami when you
put it like that and it's easier said
than done. Louie. Um, on this podcast we
spend a lot of time looking at the kind
of mechanics of empire. How young
Scotsmen get sent out to the East India
Company in the 18th century to rule over
a million people. How Belgians were
taught not to see congalles suffering
even though they were cutting the hands
and and the and the feet off these
people. Did you feel that you understood
how that sort of thing could happen when
you're in the West Bank with someone
like Daniela Weiss who can just take the
water and the land of people that really
have very little uh and and they're
taking more and more and they're driving
them out and they're really not thinking
about what happens to these people other
than they've got to go. This is our
land. These guys don't belong here.
They've just got to go.
>> There's a couple of dimensions to that.
I think uh I think oppression tends to
uh it tends to like obviously happens in
different contexts but one is a sense of
victimization like if it if we take our
foot off his neck then his foot will be
on our neck and that's very much the
thinking uh among parts of the settler
community
>> we'll get a jihadi state here that sort
of
>> well not wholly without merit like
there's so much anger understandable
anger and resentment but um and and and
and you hear a lot, well, look how many
Muslim nations there are. They'll say,
and we've want we want one Jewish
nation, and now they're trying to take
that away from us. Uh, I also think, you
know, never underestimate people's
ability to just go along with whatever's
happening, right? you know Mildrum's
famous experiments on authority where he
found that people were willing to
inflict electric shocks on strangers if
someone above them was saying don't
worry I'm in charge and you have to do
this you know you have to remember in
the West Bank there's there's there's
several constituencies you know apart
from the sort of the 3 million
Palestinians who live there and have
lived there for generations
um you have 700,000
uh settlers thereabout of whom most of
them would consider themselves non
ideological. They're living in
relatively suburban style homes in in
settlements that are not ostensibly like
stockades like they would look maybe
like a a suburban community in the
Midwest somewhere or in the West in
Phoenix, Arizona. Uh and they're just
looking for cheap housing like and and
people tune tune out they they tune out
what they don't see.
>> It's half the price of of stuff in Tel
Aviv. They they young couples go there.
>> You get a house. A lot of them are from
abroad. They'll be they might have come
in and and found out that they've come
in from maybe Russia or or or America
and they're getting cheap housing and
various benefits. They've been
incentivized and there's this
extraordinary
extent to which uh the Palestinian
experience is made to be invisible. You
know, the the the architecture and the
infrastructure of the place is is
explicitly designed to uh make the
Palestinian world invisible much as
prisons are here. Yeah, like I drove
down to W on Wsworth at the weekend and
we drove past Wsworth prison. I was
like, it's amazing how there's trees
planted so that you can see Wsworth
Common on one side, but you can't
actually see the prison. And a similar
thing happens in the West Bank where
behind walls and kind of these these
blast walls and and then a series of
checkpoints. There'll be a Palestinian
city that might have a, you know, four
or 500,000 people in it that you would
never, if you were a settler during
driving on a settler road, you would
never know about. So, it's hard to feel
compassion for something that you never
see. And then within the consenting ring
of that, you have armies following
orders who have this slightly guilty way
about them when you interact with them.
sometimes, not always, but there's
sometimes there's a bit like
unfortunately yes, you know, you uh we
have to stop you and they're just as it
were like the the Scottish guy, you
know, sent out to Burma um following
orders and then you have the engine room
which is the fanatical ideological
settler who is is often not from abroad
like it might be a homegrown Israeli and
and they are following the will of God
as they see it and completely
committed to the vision of recovering
the land. You know, when I talked to Ary
Bramovich, he was from Texas originally,
but his whole thing was like if people
just understood like this is going to
create peace for everyone, like every
nation. like his idea was like and
they'll talk they don't talk about
recovering the the temple mount but
that's always slightly in the background
the this sort of messianic idea that and
then we're going to then if we can just
build the temple o on the dome of the
rock on the temple mount then uh I I I
don't quite know what h what the
theology of it but the idea is and then
there'll be peace on earth for millions
of years so they see themselves as
idealists
>> I I mean I I I've been sort of looking
at your work um over many years and I
think I think what you do is really
interesting and I think the space that
you give people to speak and also the
fact that you leave the spaces in to me
is utterly fascinating and if you work
as I do I work for the BBC but I work in
in news and you don't have room for the
spaces it seems to me that you've been
studying this the same question for for
around 30 years now which is how
ordinary people end up sort of holding
either extreme or or fringe beliefs
whatever and then acting on them and I I
wanted to bring in the thing that's you
know blown up for you this here uh
inside the manosphere on Netflix and
just again I mean if you are one of the
two people who hasn't seen this now this
is all about sort of men selling courses
and and lifestyle it's a particular
brand of swaggering misogyny and they
target teenage boys largely now on the
surface you couldn't get something
that's more different from the settlers
it's a film about you know land and
military occupation but watch them back
to back as I have and it's all about the
construction of an enemy who isn't quite
human. He's, you know, not human, you
know, communities of men who've decided
that those people are outside our tribe
and empathy. They don't deserve it. I
mean, am I overreaching or is that is
that something that you feel?
>> Well, that's a really good point because
when you started speaking, I was like,
these worlds are so different. One is
primarily financial like the those
influences online are mainly money
motivated. their their outrage is often
almost a kind of
>> confected
>> a confected almost a shop window to to
what's behind which is an attempt to
sell a a kind of dodgy financial product
uh an app or or an online course or
something whereas the settlers the ones
I was meeting they they you know they
live almost in an impoverished way some
of them like one of the characters I met
was called Malkeiel and he's a horse
wrangler living in a tent in a in a
caravan Man, it was like a gypsy
encampment, wasn't it? It was
>> like a gypsy. Yeah. Like like a lot of
them look like cowboys. Uh they have
this sort of frontier almost ragged.
They have guns on their hips and cowboy
hats. It's not a grift like they're not
doing they're not in it for the money.
Um yeah. Uh even you know Daniela Weiss
herself lives abstly. But but I think
you you identify something correct which
is that
>> oh few because I thought you had agreed
with me and then with demolishing. Good.
>> No no no. But but I think the part is
the part that's correct is yes, they're
both they're identities that are
constructed on the idea of an other and
and a a kind of venomous and and
dangerous cabal if you like and um a
sense that there's these evildoers who
who are attempting to outflank them and
that they in turn have to match the en
the perceived
level of threat of the enemy by being
just as dangerous or more dangerous. Uh,
so I think that that that's very true.
And oddly the in the manosphere it's a
kind of conspiracy that they cast as
having a Jewish they put a sort of
Jewish lens. No, not they put a Jewish
character on what they perceive as what
they call a matrix. um this sort of uh
international cabal of of of powerful
financiers u and thought leaders who are
attempting to keep the population
subjugated and and among the settlers uh
they they see the Palestinian other a
Palestinian other that's being supported
uh by the west by European loans and and
kind of sort of glo I suppose globalist
kind of enemy
>> the anti-semitism thing came as a a
surprise because you know I just thought
they hated women. I thought they hated
me. But, you know, it turns out that
they have this this whole idea that this
is a, you know, there are puppet masters
who are working all of this and anybody
who opposes them is sort of being funded
by or uh brainwashed by this cabal as
you've just described it.
>> A satanic cabal. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Satanic, you know, pointing to
pictures saying, "Look, there you see
there's a sign that there's Satan." But
the what what interested me is when you
sort of push them, they say and and you
you make it very clear that it sounds
preposterous. In fact, with the satanic
thing, you say, "Are you are you are you
serious? Are you really saying Satan is
running the world?" They'll back off it
sometimes. I mean, not the Satan guy,
but a lot of the time they will back
down and come back. Does that mean that
the manosphere are you saying is is
artificial completely? Where because I
really feel they hate women. I don't
think that's artificial. I don't think
it's all artificial, but some of it is
performative. And like I do think to
some extent these modes are not binary.
Like we all go in and out of different
uh registers, right? And perform
ourselves in ways that aren't
consistent. Um I I think that I think
there's a time, you know, I think
there's times when they say things for
effect that like HS Ticky, real name
Harrison Sullivan, an Essex influencer
and fitness guy who we follow. He
there's a moment where he goes around.
We see we see footage of him going
the Jews again and again chanting it and
um
>> and and truthfully
I don't think there's much thought
behind it. Like I don't think he's
really particularly troubled by the idea
of Jewish people. I think he just knows
that it's outrageous and it will be
picked up. Um I think they but at the
same time I think he is genuinely sexist
like in the old-fashioned sense. I think
he's someone who thinks that women are
basically just a way for him to get his
sexual needs met and at the same time he
deplores the idea of women being
promiscuous. So it's a it's complicated
like that there's part the internet is
very lucrative uh you know if you I some
say like it's very lucrative to be a
dick on the internet. It's almost become
a job like to to actually like go online
and be a plonker and um
>> and at the same time it doesn't come
from nowhere. They know it resonates
with people not partly because it's
funny to some and partly because they're
connecting with the idea of feeling
disempowered and that there needs to be
a reset and that men aren't getting
taken seriously enough.
>> We're we're going to take a break in a
moment which but I just just before we
take the break, do you not find are you
not a very depressed man? Because if it
is that easy to monetize rage, I mean,
why why why are we going on Lou? What's
the point of any of this, you know, if
it's that simple,
>> right? Well, as a program maker, uh, and
having a you having sort of lived
through this disruption of the media
landscape, that part of it I find quite
depressing. Like, you know, the fact
that all of the big channels, the legacy
channels, BBC, Channel 4, ITV are
struggling, right? that I do find
depressing. As a student of the human
condition
who has a kind of pyromaniacal
pleasure in observing the degeneracy of
how we are as people like something I
think I might have got from my dad. I do
actually quite enjoy um I sort of
luxuriating in the awfulness of what we
are. I will embarrass Louie by saying
this, but for my generation that started
doing travel writing in the early 80s,
um the great railway bazaar was our
Bible and and he'd sold something like
1.5 million copies and it showed that we
could just go off on trains or go
wandering around sort of Turkey and and
and write a book. It was it was too good
to be true. But are you updating what he
did? is is your version of of uh you
know you've got to obviously got a
camera rather than writing books and and
you're not jumping on trains so much as
sort of you know driving around and
talking to people but do you feel that
there's there's a great commonality?
Have you talked this over with him?
>> No, I haven't. And first of all, it's a
high it's high praise like it's very
high praise. My dad is a, as you know, a
serious literature. Someone who who's
brilliantly gifted novelist and travel
writer with an international reputation.
More than 50 books to his name. Uh,
garlanded.
>> My other life is is one of my favorite
novels. I love that book.
>> And I think the novels perhaps deserve
more attention uh than they're given.
The travel writing is is is very is very
well read and well regarded. I'm I grew
up reading his novels first.
>> There's a version of you in my other
life. He comes to the school gates. You
said you're going to go and see your
kids at the school gates.
>> Oh jeez. Yeah, I think that was my
brother. Yeah, I think that was probably
my brother. I've got an older brother,
but there's versions of himself in
various of his books. Although he's got
lots of, you know, he doesn't
exclusively write versions of his, some
people just write versions of their own
life. No, he doesn't do that, but there
are a few that do. And um and he's he's
typically got one son. So I always think
um it's not a conflation. It's mainly my
brother. But I don't I never sort of set
out to I you know like the the short
version is I always thought oh I'm
supposed to be a writer. Like that was
the family law.
>> The family thing. You've got uncles that
do it too.
>> Yeah. The family thing basically. You
leave university and then you you write
a travel book or a no. Like that was you
the aristocracy of letters was a thing
in in our household. That was what was
the highest calling. I think I think I
probably still believe that. like
anything like TV or film is is a is kind
of poor cousin in in terms of the arts.
I got into TV
slightly by displaced from like the
pressure of feeling oh I can never write
a book as good as my dad's. So I thought
I'll write for television and I'll write
something like I sitcoms were big. This
was the early 90s and then um I I
struggled to get hired on a sitcom and
then I got hired by Michael Moore for
his series TV Nation and began
presenting segments. So there was never
there was never thing like oh I'm going
to do the great railway bazaar but as a
travelog I don't even like travalogs on
TV that much like as a genre.
>> You can you can do without portillo can
you?
>> I haven't watched much portillo. I mean
I do I like uh Michael Palin uh but my
go-to has always been classical
documentary especially immersive
documentary where you are absolutely you
have a kind of continuity of character
through the film that the that maybe
there's a reporter like Alan Wicker was
something of an influence for those who
can remember that idea of someone who's
immersed in an experience who's the
who's sort of the straight man in the
comic sense in a world gone mad
navigating through and especially where
he they get out of their depth in some
way and they're exposed to uh the
extremes of the human condition. So I
never I I struggle with that authoral I
know I'm talking way too much of but
this is this is going to quite a deep
place that authoral voice of the travel
writer like and then I went here and I
and I and I went to see the uh the
Spanish Steps and Amanda did vomited on
my shoe and I went back to the hotel and
I I always thought I don't really I'm
not you know I I think I'm more I'd like
to see I'd like to sort of see someone
immersed in their lives somehow. You
prefer I want Temple Mount and someone
shot me with the Uzi. There's more
>> basically. Yeah.
>> But but one thing Louis I mean you know
you there is now this thing that's
called theu method. You must be aware of
this you know sort of being slightly
very polite slightly bewildered asking
the obvious questions again and again
and really giving the subject enough
rope. Um, and and I I wonder if some of
them I mean we talked about two people
here, HS tick-talkie and Daniela Weiss,
and I wonder if there are any parallels
between them in that, you know, they are
unimbarable. They are, you know, there's
is there is there anything else that
sort of links them together in your
mind?
>> First of all, thank you for the Thuru
method. I didn't know uh what it was. It
sounds a bit like a massage technique,
right? or musicians use it uh with you
know to improve their posture when
they're playing their instrument. The
the technique it's controversial.
>> No, yours is a method. It's Alexander's
got the technique. You've got the
method.
>> Got the I've got the through method. I
apologize for having propagated a
journalistic method. I do think that
there's parallels. I I mean in just
purely technically and structurally they
occupy the exact same place in their
respective programs that you see them
both three times and the climactic
moment of both films involves uh a
showdown as it were where I basically
present my case and say here's why I
have a problem with what you're doing.
Having gathered my my data having done
my research and due diligence I'm
presenting my case against you. She
pushes me. He pushes me virtually in the
sense of of he actually films me.
Instead of push me, he he does something
much smarter, which is he films me, live
streams me, and then crowdsources
questions that will embarrass me and
then put clips them and goes viral uh
with me looking stupid. That's the first
observation. What do they have in in in
in common objectively as people? It's
it's just as you yeah it's I think a
quality of of shamelessness you know a
quality of you know in a culture based
on shame if you're shameless it's a
superpower if you have no if you're
unmbarrassable if there's nothing if you
have complete conviction and I think
actually on that metric Daniela has um
has the advantage over HS like I saw HS
uncomfortable there were times when he
seemed worried by things that I did
>> he was terrified that he was going to
get uh get hung up
>> yeah he he did this thing which we we
used throughout the film which is do
monologues to his followers on social
media. Anytime I left. Yeah. Anytime I
left which is great. It gave it a sort
of Shakespearean grammar where he was
doing siloquiz between scenes you know
the beginning and the end of scenes like
um was ever wenching this woman woo you
know except he's going like I think Faru
might be trying to cook me. I'm not too
sure. You know it's like Iago isn't it?
Um, but I think uh so he had that
uncertainty and she she never cracked
there's there's not a cintilla of
vulnerability that I ever saw in her. I
I'm sure it's there, but I never saw it.
>> I mean, some some people will object to
the comparison. And the reason they both
came to my mind, I think, is because
they're both the the most recent
protagonists of your most recent films.
>> Who do you think would object to the
comparison?
>> Well, I I suppose some people would say,
look, one has a one has an ideological
belief. No, I'm saying people who sort
of follow, you know, some one has an
ideological belief and the other one has
a six-pack and makes money, you know. I
I guess
>> which one is rich? Daniela Weiss doesn't
have a six-pack.
>> No. Okay. All right. Very funny. Very
funny. Um, final question because we are
we are running out of time. Who is the
person you really want to get who's
proving hard to get? Because we might be
able to help you. You know, 90 million
downloads. I I know it's nothing to you,
but you know, they might be listening.
Who you want to get? There's so many
people uh I don't know where to start. I
find um the world of AI bafflingly
intriguing. So I think someone like
Peter Teal that who who runs Palanteer
this
>> he would be fascinating. I was giving a
lecture in LA last year and he was
giving another one upstairs on the
antichrist in the same building but
sadly security was a bit tight. Yeah,
there's a religious dimension there, but
but also this sort of sense in which he
he seems to envision a world in which we
we transcend the human form. And and by
we, I think I just mean a few a handful
of billionaire tech bros will upload
their consciousnesses to um to sort of
data farms and um be roaming around the
the kind of the digital ether like gods.
But if I can't get him, I've I've been
trying to get Demis Habis, who's the
most brilliant AI gifted AI expert,
developer, programmer in the UK. Um, and
he's up in North London. So, and and he
seems rather benign figure. So, I' I'd
love to to talk to him. And then on a
more prosaic note, the comedian Peter
Kay.
>> That's going to be a that's going to be
lovely. No one's going to push anyone.
>> There we go. That'll be more That seems
more achievable.
>> No one's going to shove anybody in that
one. Yeah. Yeah. It's going to be quite
a let down to people who expect a
certain benefit of brutality.
>> Louie, to return to our settlers, my
final question, the settlers in 20 years
time, where do you see that? Do you see
any conceivable reverse button on what
they're doing? Because it felt I my my
biggest anxiety watching it was that
it's now so strong and so irreversible.
They are so full of conviction, so well
organized. Um, and the Palestinians are
so much on the run that another NAKBA
seems more probable than not. Would you
agree or what do you think?
>> I think it's hard to see the likelihood
of a shift of in the balance. it seems
only to be going in one direction and
more than that and I've said this before
I think others around the world are
looking at how uh you know other
authoritarian
and ethnationalist regimes are looking
at what's happening in the West Bank
admiringly
you know figures like Mille in Argentina
maybe Bardella in France um
this sort of underground international
underground or I mean underground but
it's a sort of there's a sort of
community of kind of in the vanguard of
of of Trump as well who sort of and I
think you know to the the broader point
I think they see Islam generally as a
threat I think that's where that's how
they would try and explain what they
were doing they would say like well we
we're just trying to protect ourselves
and so there's a sympathetic
international constituency in the west
for what uh is happening in the West
Bank And in the end, um, you know,
disappointingly, even the regimes in the
Middle East, from what I see, don't seem
massively invested in the preservation
of of a kind of rule of law and basic
civil rights. And those agencies that
are are attempting to police what's
happening, like the ICJ or the UN are
just increasingly being
>> marginalized and and and and sort of
there's an effort to discredit them. So,
it's it is very it is a it is a
dispiriting outlook. Listen, it's been
so great talking to you. I know you we
have to let you go because you've got a
school run and that as we all know is
the most important thing. Um, thank you
so much for being with us. Um, Louis
documentary The Settlers is on BBC eye
player inside the manosphere. You can
find that on Netflix. And till the next
time we meet, it's goodbye from me,
Anita Arnan,
>> and goodbye from me, William Dimple.
>> Thank you so much.